[BLANK_AUDIO]
Hey everyone, this lecture features Keith
Baggerly, who is a professor
in the Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Department
at the MD Anderson Cancer Center.
Here in this lecture, he's talking about a
case that happened with some
researchers at Duke University regarding
using
high dimensional genomic signatures in
cancer outcomes.
So take a look at this lecture.
It's a really important story and I think
there are
a lot of important lessons that you can
learn from the experience that you went
through.
>> Okay.
So, thank you for sticking around for the
very last session.
We're in the home stretch.
And I really appreciate you being here.
So that's a very good thing.
And I want to talk a lot about a theme
that we haven't focused on explicitly
in this conference so far, which is the
importance of reproducible research in
high throughput biology.
As these, as we're generating better and
better essays, and we're generating more
and more measurements, thousands of
things,
it becomes increasingly important since
the analysis
takes a larger and larger chunk of time
That at some stage, not
only us, but others, should be able to
precisely reproduce what we did.
In other words, if they start with the
same numbers, should they get the same
results?
And we'd like that to be true.
Now, this is actually really important in
high-throughput
biology for a somewhat different reason.
Which is simply that.
And once I will get this advanced then we
will tell you what it is.
Let's see.
Okay, well, I can gesture and I can tell
you what it is.
Which is simply that our intuition about
what makes
sense in high-throughput biology actually
is pretty darn poor.
What I mean by that is that in many cases,
I've worked
with clinicians where I've gone in and
said, this gene has gone up.
And that means these people are most, more
likely to develop advance cancer.
And the clinician turned to me and said
no, what that means is that you've
got strumble contamination in your samples
because I've worked with
that gene for 15 years and I know how it
behaves.
And they're right.
They have intuition for single genes.
On the other hand, if I go to that same
clinician and I give
them a, the following signature of 100
genes and I say this goes up.
Well, they all stare at this list at 100
genes and they'll say yeah,
I can see that because this will influence
this and this will influence this.
And it's wonderful it's a Rorschach test
for biologists to give
them a gene list of 100 things.
And unfortunately we've tried the null
experiment of giving a random
list to some of our biologists and they
still find patterns.
So this is somewhat of a warning.
Now, in light of this, we find it somewhat
dismaying that when we go to the
literature and we
take a, take a typical paper, and we try
to
figure out what was done, the
documentation is often poor.
And if the documentation is poor, in some
cases, if the finding
is important, we are forced to resort to
what
we have come to refer to as Forensic
Bioinformatics.
Which involves starting with the results
and the
raw data and saying what must they have
done to get from one place to the
other, regardless of what the methods say
they did.
Okay?
And I want to illustrate this, and how
important
this might be, by considering a specific
clinical example.
Specifically using signatures,
genomic signatures, to try to predict
response to chemo-sensitivity.
And this is actually based on work that
appeared
a few years ago now at the end of 2006.
This is a paper that showed up in Nature
Medicine and what they said,
what they claim in this paper was that
they figured out a really great thing.
Specifically, starting with cell lines,
they figured out how to come
up with genomic signatures of sensitivity
to a whole bunch of drugs.
So here's how this worked, they're
not just working with any panelist,
[INAUDIBLE].
They're working with the NC160, and the
NC160 as was
eluded to in the last talk, is a very
special thing.
One reason it's very special is that it's
a
standard panel maintained by the National
Cancer Institute and what
that means, is that if you've got a new
chemotherapeutic,
that agent will be sent to the National
Cancer Institute.
And they will test it for efficacy against
this panel of 60 cell lines.
And that takes, that information about
which drugs
are most effective against which cells,
that's public data.
You can go and you can download it and you
can download this information for every
single chemotherapeutic now available.
So, if you configure it, how to leverage
that information, that's potentially a way
to use or choose the best single drug
that's out there for a given patient.
So what they said was they said, okay if
using the NCI60, let's start with a drug
of interest like Docetaxel.
Let's pick the sudden most sensitive, and
most resistant cell lines.
Okay, those are our extremes.
Let's take array profiles of those cell
lines, okay, fine.
Let us contrast them and identify the
genes that
are most different between group one and
group two.
These genes will comprise elements of our
sensitivity signature and then they say
let's fit
a model to come up with the sensitivity
signature and for doing this they use meta
genes which sounds really cool.
But to mathematicians, we otherwise know
it as
principal components and I'm going to use
that terminology.
And they're going to say okay, using these
meta
genes lets try to fit the cells lines and
predict
on clinical samples and they tried this
with a whole
bunch of public data sets using seven
commonly used agents.
They reported great results and I know
this was
really flashy because within two weeks of
this paper appearing,
we had three different groups of MD
Anderson coming to us
in Bioinformatics and saying we want to do
this, help us do this.
And being helpful bioinformaticians we
said sure, we'd love to do that.
And in particular, since all of the data
involved is public, we should be able to
go out and figure out how to do
it ourselves, and generalize it to other
trials.
So okay.
Let's, so let's, let's try that.
And we decided to try that starting with
docetaxel.
So we're, starting with the most sensitive
and most resistant
cell lines.
In this case, we're going to be using U95
A arrays for the NCI60.
And these arrays were run in triplicates,
we've got three for each.
And when we did this, and we tried to fit
the training data,
here is a plot of the first two principle
components of these things.
And what you can see, not too
surprisingly,
is that you have some pretty clear
separation
between all the resistant ones at the
left,
and all the sensitive ones at the right.
This little triangle of three things,
those
are three replicates of the same cell
line.
So that's sort
of what we expect to see.
Now this separation should not surprise
you.
This is the training set.
We have picked the genes specifically to
achieve this separation.
What we now what to see is we now want to
see clinical samples projected
into this same space and see the
separation so that we can use it
ourselves.
So we took the predicted, the actual page
information, and we projected it into the
space.
And we did not see the separation that we
were really hoping and expecting to see.
So of course, this led to the natural
question of, did we do something wrong?
And this is of course, well now we're
going to start to reconstruct exactly what
was done.
And to do this we begin by saying, okay,
well okay, what were
the signatures or the, the specific genes
that they used for the individual drugs?
And this is actually somwhat easy because,
in the supplementary material
to their paper, they included, here are
the
lists for each drug of all the accumetric
proset IDs that are involved and all the
genes that are involved and in, then in
the paper they also gave some exp,
explanations
about Here are some genes that make sense
in the context of this drug, because it
explains the biology and so on, like that.
So, okay.
So we decided to pick one of the drugs,
and we started with 5-Fluorouracil.
And what we want to be able to do with
this, is
we want to be able to construct a heatmap
that looks like this.
This is a heatmap that actually
showed up in the paper.
This is of the 45 genes that they picked
out for 5-Fluorouracil.
And one of the things that you can see is
this plaid pattern
because every one of the 45 genes has a
pattern that we like.
In other words, high in one group and low
in the other, four low then high.
So, okay.
Extreme separation, that's what we expect.
That's what we want in the cell lines.
So, well, how'd they pick these?
Well, they picked these using two sample
t-tests, and I'm a PhD level
statistician so I figured out how to do
two sample t-tests by this point.
So we tried it ourselves.
So here's our best 45 using t-tests.
So okay, great.
And then we said, all right, let's take
the list of affymetrix probeset IDs for
there 45
and take a look at that heatmap, and we
didn't see, again, what we were expecting
to see.
So we then decided to try something which
we've learned to unfortunately do
every once in a while, which is to be just
a bit paranoid about
the data.
And what we did then was we took our list
and theirs, and we put them side by side.
So there's their list and there's ours.
Does anybody notice a pattern here?
[LAUGH]
What we have here is an off by one
indexing error.
This is true for all of the genes in this
signature.
Now what does that say to you about
whether or not certain
genes making sense in terms of the
biology, really holds.
When they're referencing a set of genes
that actually isn't involved.
So now of course this is just one drug.
They looked at seven.
So there's six others, so what we decided
to
do for these six others was we basically
took
their reported affymetrix IDs, moved down
one, and looked
at the p.values to see if they're really
small.
So let's see.
Well!
Topo Tico yep, they're all off by one!
And Topo side off by one.
Adriamycin is mostly off by one.
There's a few we can't explain.
Paclitaxel mostly off by one.
Docetaxel mostly off by one.
And Cytoxan we have no earthly idea what
they did with this drug.
So OK, fine.
We've got this, and we know that's one
problem.
Now, how is it that this problem could
arise?
And to answer that one, we went in and
we looked at the software that they were
using.
And as a side note, if you want to read
documentation on how
this software works.
You should go to our website, because I
wrote it, because we couldn't find any.
And one of the things that we noted was
that
their software, in order to work, required
two input files.
The first input file is the quantification
matrix, genes by samples and this
matrix needs a header, where the header is
either zero, one or two.
To indicate that this is a training sample
sensitive, training
sample resistant or a test sample whose
outcome we don't know,
that's the first input; the quantification
matrix.
The second input is a list of gene IDs,
gene
names in the same order as in the
quantification matrix.
But, for their software to work correctly,
this
second input must not have a header row.
So if you start with an excel file and you
copy and you paste
and you've got a title at the top that
says gene name, guess what happens?
You will get an
off by one indexing error.
And if you run this through your software
we tried this with Docetaxel and
we perfectly matched the heatmaps and we
also got some of these offset genes.
So we know that works.
But again that's one drug Docetaxel out of
seven so what happens with the other six.
Well, let's take a look.
Okay [UNKNOWN] we can perfectly match the
heatmaps.
We know what cell lines are involved.
We know what genes they should be
producing.
Okay, fine.
Adriamycin perfect, Etoposide perfect,
5-FU perfect,
Paclitaxel well, they mislabeled it as
cyclophosphamide in the paper but okay.
And cyclophosphamide we still have no
earthly idea what they did this sheet.
So okay.
There's, There's, There's we can perfectly
match the
heat maps for six of the seven drugs.
We understand what they did.
Now actually, before we go on, I should
note that this should actually bother you.
And the reason it should bother you is
that we've
perfectly matched the heatmaps for six of
the seven drugs.
But we managed to perfectly match the gene
lists for
only three.
For four of the drugs, there are included
other genes that we can't explain just
yet.
They are outliers.
And we'll come back to those because
before
we get there, we also noticed in using
their
software that something that was more
important to
us, which was that their software also
gave predictions.
And this is the clinical thing that we're
really interested in.
We want to know, is this patient going to
be sensitive or not.
So, we wanted to see, can we get good
predictions
out of the software.
And the way we're going to check this
well, there's a
bit of a problem in that the paper doesn't
say,
for the fit and data sets that they fit,
this
patient turned out to be sensitive, this
one resistant, no.
They just gave us an overall rate of
accuracy, okay, so that
they got, if they got 24 patients, they
got 22 of them right.
Okay, fine.
So we're going to say that we understand
the classification algorithm or
this thing well enough to use it if we can
get accuracies
at least as good as the ones that they
report, okay?
That's our bar.
So that of course, brings about the next
question, which
is, just how good are the accuracy rates
that they obtain?
So we're going to look at this in the
context of Docetaxel.
And this top plot is a figure from the
paper and you can see the
scores for the sensitive patient's and
they are
mostly low with blue squares and that's
good.
Resistant ones are high and they've got
red triangles and that's good.
And I have a question here.
I have an analysis
question for the audience.
The analysis question is how many blue
squares are
there?
13.
That is correct.
We have up there in the top plot.
13 sensitive samples and 11 resistant
ones.
Now there's a second panel on this page
right here.
The thing is this panel doesn't come from
this paper.
This panel comes from a paper by Chang et
al.
They're the ones that actually introduced
the test set being analyzed here.
And according to Chang et all they thought
that they had 11 sensitive and 13
resistant.
So 13 and 11 or
11 and 13.
That may be a problem so we decided to
take a look at a different drug.
Namely Adriamycin and for those of you who
are real math whizzes here.
How many red triangles are there?
Okay?
For those who are not quite that
ambitious,
are there more red triangles or blue
squares?
Come on.
This is not a trick question.
I hear red triangles are what.
So basically we've got a whole bunch of
patients that are resistant to therapy.
The problem is, in this case, the
underlying dataset that's applied
to this thing, this was from a paper on
childhood leukemia.
The reason this is a problem is that
childhood leukemia is a
disease for which we've actually got a
pretty good cure rate, around 80%.
And what that means, is that if we've got
a drug to
which most of the patients are resistant,
which wouldn't be using it.
And indeed, if we go
back to the original paper that submitted
it,
they thought that most of their patients
were sensitive.
So what do we think is going on?
We think, that for zero and one, they
swapped the interpretation in
feeding it into the data and they didn't
realize what they were doing.
Now, what does this mean clinically?
It means that what, well, their going to
use that signature, and they're going
to use Adriamycin just for the patients
who will derive no benefit from it.
This is poor clinical practice.
So, we don't think this is a good idea.
So, given this there is the question of,
okay, if they're mixing things up
this badly, how is it that they're getting
good predictions in the first place?
And actually, this leads back to one of
the things that we passed
on just a few minutes ago which is that
there were some other genes.
And in particular, for docetaxel, there
were 50 genes.
If we take our list of Docetaxel and we do
this off by one trick, we match 31 that
leaves 19.
Of these 19,
there's the question of where can they
come from?
Well, if you go back to the initial paper
by Chang et al that supplied the test set.
They say if you want to separate R
resistance from R
sensitives, here's a list of 92 genes
that'll do the job.
So we said, okay, let's take a look at the
19 we can't match and compare them
with the 92 they report and we find out
that there is an overlap of 14 genes.
There you go, they are entries 7 through
20 in this list, one contiguous block.
I think we have some statisticians in the
audience, so quick question.
If I pick 14 items at random from a list
with 92 in
it, how often do they all, all appear
right next to each other?
The p value is small, you can get
published with this one.
okay, now of course, this still leaves
five.
What are the other five?
Well, they're ERCC1, ERCC4, ERBB2,
BCL2L11, and TUBA3.
The thing that kind, that, the common
theme of these five is
that these are the genes mentioned by name
in the paper to explain
why the signature works.
So for the docetaxel signature we have the
genes
that work to split the test set, the genes
that work to split the training set, and
the
genes that are there to explain why it
works.
And there is no overlap between these
three.
We thought this was somewhat disturbing.
So we wrote a letter to Nature Medicine.
And one of the things about this being a
talk on reproducible
research, is that you don't have to take
my word for it.
Which means that you can go to Nature
Medicine, you can read
the paper.
You can also read our reports, which
contain all of our code.
You can run it through R, and you will get
the same numbers we do.
As a side note for data compression our
note to nature medicine is 700 words.
There's 140 pages of supplementary
material for those 700 words there.
So there's a bit of a compression there.
So that one's fun.
And so all the data's there.
And then of course we waited to see okay
is there a response.
So they say oh well whoops we got it
wrong.
We'll fix it next time.
Well no that wasn't quite the response.
The response was well, unfortunately the
analysis of Baggerly
and Coombes is deeply flawed and amongst
other errors.
Well, first off for adriamycin the labels,
this is
the one where they have a lot of red
triangles.
The labels are actually correct.
And we've posted details on our website to
illustrate this.
And they must be wrong because we've
gotten this approach to work
again and in their rebuttal they note that
they've done it twice.
In new papers with editorials and things
like that.
So we must have
screwed up.
And well given the timing I'm not going to
be
able to go through all of these but I want
to look at some of the data for one or
two of these just to illustrate what might
be going on.
So let's start with Adriamycin.
For Adriamycin they say they've got the
labels correct on their website.
So we went to their webpage and we said
what's there?
Well actually, when we went there we saw
that there's a table of quantification for
144 samples.
22 for training
cell lines, and 122 for test.
These are the patient ones, for which
they're making predictions.
And we said, well, maybe we can find
something that separates the
responders from the non-responders, so we
decide, let's try to cluster it.
And as a prelude to that, let's just
check the correlations between individual
pairs of elements.
And what I'm going to show you now, is a
plot of
all the really high correlations we see in
this matrix of 144 samples.
Here's the sub-matrix corresponding to the
training data, the cell lines.
And here's the test data.
Now the red line on the main diagonal we
expected.
Samples are indeed highly correlated with
themselves, that's good.
However, we didn't expect these red dots
off the main diagonal.
What's going on?
Well, turns out they have 122 test
samples, but the 122 are not all distinct.
There are some samples that they have
reused two,
three, or even four times.
And there's a sample right about here
which has been reused four
times which has been labeled as resistant
three times out of four.
Now that's the same sample.
So we're pretty pretty convinced that the
labels are not all correct even now.
So we set a further note to Nature
Medicine about
this and Nature Medicine forwarded this on
to the authors.
And then they got back to us and said well
they'll adjust it so we see no publish
your note.
Okay, fine and,
indeed, what they said later in August of'
08, was that
they had redone the analysis using only
the 95 unique samples.
And they had, again, gotten great results.
Now, for those of you were listening to me
carefully before, you
will recall that I said that there were
actually 84 distinct samples.
So hearing that there were 95 was a bit of
a surprise to us.
So, okay, but fine.
And what'd they do now?
Well, when they corrected this in August
08, they actually
took down the quantifications and they
just put up a list.
Of the 95 geo
IDs of the areas involved.
So, lemme show you the first 20 of the 95
they now list.
And I've highlighted a few of them,
because that used twice,
that used twice, this one used twice and
labeled both ways.
So actually, of the 95, which is, the is
the second correction, by the way, 15 are
in duplicate.
Of those 15, 16, six are labeled both ways
and furthermore since
they've actually note, now told us the Geo
I.D.s of the individual arrays.
We can actually go back and figure out
what the initial submitters
thought they were, in terms of resistant
or sensitive.
So, the group, the dup group says that 61
are resistant, 13 are sensitive, and six
we don't know.
The people submitting the data thought
that 22 were
resistant, 48 were sensitive, and 10 they
labeled as intermediate.
They didn't classify them.
So for Adriamycin, we're not convinced
this works.
Well, all right, there's still other
things that they put out there.
There's other papers with editorials.
So let me show you one of those.
This is a paper
that showed up in the Journal of Clinical
Oncology, by Hsu et al.
And in this paper, they extended the
approach
to deal with two new drugs, Cisplatin and
Pemetrexed.
These are important in treating lung
cancer.
And one of the things that they thought
was really neat was
that they said, okay we actually don't
like the NCI60 for all drugs.
So we're going to shift to a different set
of cell
lines and these cell lines were profiled
on Affy U133 Arrays.
And one of the things that they did using
this, was they came up with a signature
for Cisplatin.
For Cisplatin, they pointed out something
important.
Specifically that the signature they found
contained ERCC1, ERCC4 and DNA repair
genes.
That's important because there have been
several papers in the New
England Journal saying these are related
to how you treat lung cancer.
So, that's really cool.
So what'd we do?
Well, we took the data and we said all
right let's try to see if we
can match the heatmaps so we know the cell
lines and the, and the genes involved.
And after with some work and that's
another compression thing there.
We did manage to exactly
match the heatmaps.
And for Cisplatin, after we exactly
matched the heatmap, we
took a look at the genes involved and we
discovered that
we could match 41 of the 45 genes they
report
after accounting for this off by one error
that's still there.
There's four that we can't match at all.
Do I have any guesses from the audience as
to the identities of those four?
[LAUGH] The four that we cannot match are
ERCC1, ERCC4, ERCC1 again, and FANCM, and
of these four, the last two are special.
Because as it turns out, those two aren't
on the U133A arrays, they're on the U133B.
So two of their best genes they haven't
measured yet, but
hey, who needs to conduct experiments if
you know the answer?
This is a wonderful finding.
Okay, great.
so, we were disturbed by this.
As a side note, we submitted a correction
for this one to JCO,
and they sent us a note back saying we're
sorry, we can't publish this.
And we said okay fine.
And over the next few years what went on
from there
is that there were other papers that kept
on coming 07,08,09.
But middle of last year, we learned
something new
that sort of disturbed us and what we
learned middle
of last year was that they'd already
started running clinical
trials using these rules to allocate
patients to treatment arms.
They're doing this using pemetrexed versus
cisplatin, pemetrexed
vinorelbine, docetaxel and doxorubicin.
And for several of these drugs, these are
in cases
where the posted signatures, they've
gotten the sensitivin resistant labels
reversed.
So we think this is a problem.
So we wrote up a paper on this.
We first circulated it to a biological
journal and got the comment
back that we're sorry, this story seems
too negative, can you fix that?
[LAUGH].
At which point we said well, we probably
can't.
So we sent it off to the Annals of Applied
Statistics
on the first of September.
It was accepted and published online by
the fourteenth.
At which point was covered by the press,
Duke starts an
internal investigation and suspended the
trials
pending the outcome of the investigation.
That was October of last year.
So what happened next?
As of the end of January of this year,
Duke decided to restart the trials.
And in particular, they said that their
investigation, which was now concluded,
had strengthened their confidence in this
evolving approach to personalized cancer
treatment.
Now, we were not really pleased by this.
And the main reason we were not really
pleased is
that we asked them well, okay, we don't
understand the data.
Can you show us the data and stuff you
used to reach
this conclusion.
And they said well, no.
While the reviewers that conducted these
things approved of our sharing our
report with the National Cancer Institute,
we consider it a confidential document.
So, no, you can't see it.
Which disturbed us, and, as a side note,
there's just one more thing.
Which is, that this investigation took
place between October and January.
Well as it happens in
November, something new happened.
In November they posted data, they posted
new data for one paper for dealing
with cisplatin and pemetrexed; these are
two
of the drugs they're using in clinical
trials.
And in this data, they said here are the
59 samples
that we're using as a validation set, to
show that this works.
These 59 samples are a subset of this one
geo dataset and we're using it to make
predictions.
So we said okay, cool.
We see these 59 samples.
We've got the ovarian ones.
Lets go in and take a look at them.
So the very first thing we did with these
59 samples we said lets go back to the
geo dataset and see if we can match them
up and when we did here's what we found.
So what, if the names matched up for all
the 59 samples
we should see 59 red squares lying on this
blue diagonal line.
How many red squares do you see lying on
that blue diagonal line?
This is not a heart pounding question.
[LAUGH].
None.
43 of the samples they got the labels
wrong.
For 16 they didn't get the labels wrong or
at
least, the problem is for these 16, we
can't tell.
The reason we can't tell is that for those
16, they've scrambled the
gene labels so badly that we don't know
what samples they correspond to.
What this means is that for their
validation data set, every single sample
is incorrect for two drugs they've been
using in clinical trials for two years.
We think this is disturbing.
So what happened next?
We pointed this out at the end of January.
No response.
So we then said, can we do anything else?
And it occurred to us that they said,
well, we won't show
you the report But the reviewers approved
us sending it the NCI.
Now the NCI in the US, is a federally
funded institution
and what that means is that they are
subject to Federal law,
specifically the Freedom of Information
Act.
So, in April we filed a request with the
NCI to get the report under the Freedom
of Information Act and the start of May
a redacted version of the report was
indeed supplied.
And we looked at it and we found a few
things
that were rather interesting in the report
or weren't in the report.
The two main things that we found were
that first off
the review committee that went through
this stuff the people who evaluated
it said by the way we couldn't figure out
from
the data that has been published how to do
this.
The only way we got it was because there
was extra information
supplied to us and we really recommend the
investigators make that public.
So that's one thing.
The other thing that we found rather
disturbing was what wasn't there,
specifically, this report
makes no mention of those problems with
cisplatin
and pemetrexed that I just told you about.
It's not there.
So we pointed this out in May, and also in
May, we asked the
National Cancer Institute, what do you
think about what's going on?
And well, they said, let's look at the
trials.
We actually don't fund those three clin,
clinical trials.
We do fund another one that's a phase
three.
And actually based on that they
re-investigated the rationale and they
yanked that
signature form the phase three clinical
trial in the middle of the trial.
That's mid-May.
We said okay, is there anything further
that's going to
happen with these, with the three ongoing
trials at Duke?
Nothing happened.
Nothing happened for two more months and
then in mid-July
we found out something new.
That's a bit orthogonal from your normal
statistics.
One of the PIs used to claim he was a
Rhodes Scholar.
The Rhodes Trust, in Britain, says no, no
he wasn't.
So indeed, it appears there was some CV
fudging involved.
Now, what happened then was, I knew there
were a few statisticians
who's been talking about saying, maybe we
should write a letter or something.
So, I emailed a few of them, the day this
came out and said,
you know, if you want to write a letter,
now's about the best time.
So, the following
Monday, three days later, there is a
letter from
31, 33 biostatisticians find a few that
you like.
And the cancer letter comments that Duke's
administrators have accomplished
something monumental, they triggered a
public expression of outrage from
biostatisticians.
[LAUGH] Who, cool.
But the fun thing about this letter was
that it went to the newly appointed head
of
the National Cancerous Institute, Harold
Varmus and to
Duke and to the DoD, and to the press.
So,
this one got some coverage.
So what happened then?
Duke suspended the trials.
This has since been covered, just a bit,
in a few other
outlets like NPR, Science, Nature, and
some other fly by night journals.
And a few other investigations are under
way.
And there's actually a new Google group
devoted
entirely to reproducible research and
things like that.
But, as we've been looking at this, there
is
a caveat that I think we should keep in
mind.
And that caveat is that
unfortunately, some of these mistakes,
like the off by one.
We've seen them before.
This is not the only time.
We've seen some of these examples going
back to 2002, 2003, 2005.
These types of errors have been around for
awhile.
This is an egregious combination But the
problems are there.
So some observations.
The most common mistakes are simple ones.
For example, in statistics, the simplest
one here
for genomics is complete confounding of
the experimental design.
Others involve, mixing up sample labels,
gene labels,
things that are easy to do in excel, okay.
Those are easy to mistake.
Now the fun thing about simple mistakes is
that if you see them, they're easy to fix.
But if the documentation is poor, you
won't see them.
So they will slip by, because our
intuition is no good.
And what that means, is that if you go out
to the literature,
we sort of suspect, yet the most simple
mistakes
are more common than we would like to
admit.
Now what would we like to have happen?
Well, for papers we've got a little thing
of saying here's some things we
really would like to see in addition to
data like the stuff at geo.
We'd really like some idea of if you're
going to
supply us with a table of qualifications,
please label the columns.
Tell us which samples are which and
provide code.
So these are some
other things.
And these are recommendations for papers,
but we think
they should be absolute requirements
before you start clinical trials.
Now, do we as the phrase goes, walk the
walk?
What do we do?
Well, partially in response to this, about
in early 2007, Kevin Coombes and I
went into our Department of Bioinformatics
at MD Anderson and we said, guess what?
Henceforth we
are announcing, by fiat, that all reports
that we write are
now going to be written in Sweave
combination of R and LaTeX.
The fun thing about Sweave is that you can
take these reports, you can run
them through R, somebody else can run them
through R and get the same numbers.
As a side note, most of our reports now
go, are written by stat analyst, faculty
member teams.
The analyst writes the report, submits it
to the faculty member.
The faculty member proofreads it.
Reruns the code
if necessary, and only after the second
approval
does it go off to the biological PI.
This has actually helped our
reproducibility, quite a bit.
So actually, if you ask us what we did in
any report
going back for about three years now, we
can tell you exactly.
We find that useful.
But the buzz phrase in all of this is
reproducible research.
Now, so, I've given you some observations
and
I've told you lessons that I really want
you
to derive from it, so I have one
last slide and that is to acknowledge some
folks.
So, Kevin Coombes is my primary co-author
in all of these things.
Some other folks at MD Anderson, the
various groups that provided money at MD
Anderson.
And, of course, if you want to read more,
you can go to the
Annals of Applied Statistics and you can
read the paper, you can look at
the code, even better, you can site the
paper because that will make me
famous and my mom happy and she can buy
more [UNKNOWN] ties for Christmas.
And I have one last acknowledgement which
is to you, my kind audience for bearing
with me for the past half hour, and that's
what I got.
Thank you.
[SOUND].
>> Thank you very much.